The Malaysian Anti-Corruption Commission
has seized around 5 million ringgit from
a safe house linked to a prominent
politician. The Malaysian
Anti-Corruption Commission has arrested
former army chief general MACC began
probe last year against former Prime
Minister Ismail Sabri. Malaysian
Anti-Corruption Commission is a very
powerful law enforcement agency.
It can arrest people. It can freeze
their bank accounts. It doesn't need to
use the police to do any of these
things.
There were all these high-profile raids
going on.
There were all these allegations that
there was a group of businessmen who
were working with MACC to take down
their rivals and take over companies.
We wanted to find out if there was any
truth to these allegations.
I was brought into MACC and was
questioned.
Some of the officers were intimidating
me, banging the table, screaming at me.
It's like you're cut off from the whole
world. It was a lot of hurt. Then there
was a lot of stress, anger.
People were just very scared to talk to
us. There's an immense fear that the
MACC can just one day turn up at your
doorstep and just make your life a
living hell.
What's being alleged is that the
Malaysian Anti-Corruption Commission is
actually corrupt.
This is the agency that's supposed to
police all the other agencies for
corruption in Malaysia.
One of the most explosive things is that
in some cases, questions about
suspicious conduct may lead all the way
to the very top of the organization.
I have been covering
Malaysia for over 20 years.
Malaysia is a vibrant country. It's got
great food, great mix of cultures.
And then unfortunately, Malaysia is also
known for corruption scandals.
That's it over there, right? Yep, that
is the Malaysian Anti-Corruption
Commission headquarters in Putrajaya.
And this is the administrative capital
of Malaysia. We're literally right in
the center of Putrajaya here. You've got
the Prime Minister's office there.
You've got the mosque in the center of
Putrajaya there. And the next kind of
really
important, like distinctive building on
the skyline is the MACC headquarters.
And this was supposedly a symbol of the
government's commitment to fighting
corruption.
The Malaysian Anti-Corruption Commission
investigates corruption.
It essentially reports to the Prime
Minister.
The Prime Minister in effect picks its
its chief commissioner. But in the 2015,
allegations started to emerge that Prime
Minister Najib Razak was involved in the
1MDB scandal. The massive embezzlement
of billions of dollars from the 1MDB
state fund was one of the world's
biggest financial scandals. Now, we all
know what the 1MDB scandal was, the
looting of that investment fund, the
extraordinary looting.
>> Money spent all around the world on
luxury goods including yachts, movies.
About 681 million US dollars ended up in
Najib's personal bank accounts.
At that point, the MACC started an
investigation into Najib.
But it later said the money came from a
donation.
Malaysia's attorney general said today
681 million dollars transferred into
Prime Minister Najib Razak's personal
bank account was a gift from the royal
family in Saudi Arabia.
So it was a very splashy scandal. It was
only when Najib was thrown out of power
that the next Prime Minister came in and
then ordered for the MACC to reopen
investigations.
There was a power vacuum and you had
several Prime Ministers come in.
At some point, there was the 2022
elections and Anwar waged this campaign
of cleaning up on corruption and a lot
of people believed him. They saw him as
a reformer.
Anwar and his coalition promised to make
the MACC more independent.
Malaysian King has named Anwar Ibrahim
as the country's new Prime Minister.
We are talking about the survival of
this great nation, Malaysia, for all
Malaysians in this country.
I'm a lawyer and I have been in practice
for 22 years. At some point I served as
the MACC chief.
Latifah Koya has been named as the new
MACC chief commissioner. The PMO said
the appointment is among the steps to
reform government institutions.
They've appointed police officers
before, but no one from completely
outside. They view me as obviously an
outsider. Outsiders are a trouble, you
know, basically.
Their reputation, the trust at that time
anti-corruption agency was really,
really bad.
And uh they were told to bring in our
outside consultants
to do some major changes.
You're supposed to be independent. The
reality is that if you're too
independent and if you don't follow too
much instruction,
then you may not go up. You may lose
your position. So everything is about
did I step the wrong toes?
It was a really steep learning curve for
me.
MACC chief commissioner Latifah Koya has
tendered her resignation after holding
the post for only 9 months.
It was a very brief stint, but somehow
it felt long. I thought it's best to go
back to my old life.
>> Latifah said the decision was her own
and denied speculation that there was
pressure for her to quit.
Unfortunately, when Azam came in, it's
back to square one. MACC deputy chief
commissioner Azam Baki has been
appointed as the commission's new chief
commissioner. So Azam Baki is an MACC
lifer. He's with the agency for more
than four decades. I joined in 1984.
And and uh I become senior officer in
2008. This way he steadily climbed up
the ranks. After Latifah resigned, Azam
Baki finally got the top job and became
chief commissioner.
It was kind of going back to to
convention.
He's been described to us as a very
smooth and charismatic man. Someone with
a pension for doing deals.
He loves being an enforcement officer.
He loves being in MACC. The person that
you give uh responsibility or power
cannot
hold on or loves the position too much.
That's the beginning of a problem.
We're doing lots of reporting trips to
Malaysia, talking to dozens of people.
We have gone through
thousands of pages of documents about
the MACC.
As we dug deeper, we realized there were
many stories about alleged intimidation
by the MACC out there.
People were just very scared to talk to
us.
I'm a senior management staff of a
company and one day the MACC came to the
office on a basis that a complaint was
filed and they wanted to investigate
some transactions related to the
company.
They were whispering and sending
messages to someone else. They were very
suspicious in their behavior.
Later, I was asked to go to MACC
headquarters. I was put in a room. After
a while, officers started coming in.
Then they started taking turns to ask me
questions.
And the questioning went on and on.
There was no clear direction what they
were asking me. I was stressed.
Some officers were actually
uncomfortable. I sensed that something
was definitely not right.
It appears that MACC was used as a tool
to intimidate, to pressure me to
surrender. Basically, it is harassment.
Adam alleged that the people working
with the MACC to pressure him have been
called the corporate mafia.
The corporate mafia is a term that first
appeared in a Malay language blog.
And it was a term used to describe a
network of mostly ethnic Chinese
businessmen in Malaysia
who, it was alleged in the blog, were
using the MACC to go after founders of
companies because they wanted to take
over the companies.
The blog's characterization was
misleading. The businessmen aren't mafia
in the traditional sense. There is no
rigid hierarchy.
So, the alleged playbook of this network
of individuals is roughly the same in
each case. One or more people in the
network appear on the scene at a
Malaysian listed company. And then
shortly after that, the MACC announces
that it's investigating one of the
founders of the company.
Then they're taken in for questioning,
detained by MACC officers. They were
allegedly told, "If you sell your shares
in this company to a person of the
network at a discount,
these investigations will end. Your
problems will go away."
I'm a business entrepreneur who became a
victim.
The whole thing was a setup to get me
out of the company.
I was brought into MACC and was
questioned.
The moment you are in there, they put
fear in you.
They harass you, and they deprive you of
your access, even to the lawyers.
Basically, they forcefully try to take
your statement, which, when I say A,
they'll type B.
So, they'll ask you, "Okay,
at the end of the day, you sign here."
And they don't really give you a chance
to read through.
I spent a whole day from morning until
night. I'm exhausted.
I just want to get out of the place.
When it comes to alleged intimidation by
the MACC, there have been several
instances of executives from other
companies that have gone through the
same thing.
So, this group here has been called the
corporate mafia.
This guy's name is Victor Chin.
In one lawsuit, executives called Chin
the directing mind behind efforts to
remove them from their company.
So, Victor Chin has been investigated by
several
of Malaysian agencies for tax evasion,
share manipulation, and money
laundering.
But to this date, he has not been
charged in any court.
So, we have been told by several people
that Chin prefers to operate through a
number of associates, and one of them is
this guy, Andy Lim.
We've been told by several people inside
and outside the MACC that Andy Lim is
very close to the Chief Commissioner,
Azam Baki.
We obtained an internal MACC memo, which
was written
around 2020
by officers in the MACC's intelligence
division. And what this memo lays out is
that Azam Baki and Andy Lim were close
friends.
And this was well known in the MACC.
So, here we have a link between the head
of the MACC and a person in the group
that has been called the corporate
mafia.
We know this from documents like charge
sheets, arrest warrants. The group
within the MACC
that handled the arrests and the charges
is
a section of the investigations division
of the MACC called Section D.
So, Section D has, you know, a specific
remit to cover listed companies, the
stock market, insider trading, and so
forth.
So, we have sources
in the MACC who told us that Section D
offered a range of services.
And this included
intimidation, and it could go on to
raids and arrests. And the ultimate
thing was to eventually get people
charged in court.
We had one official
from the MACC tell us
that the price could go to millions of
ringgit, and that's hundreds of
thousands of US dollars.
According to three people we spoke to,
Section D isn't a rogue faction within
the MACC.
Senior officials, including the most
senior official of the law, Chief
Commissioner Azam Baki, is aware of its
activities.
My research has been predominantly on
the topic of the relationship between
government and business.
I've also inevitably gone into the topic
of corruption.
At one point, I was appointed to one of
the panels in MACC.
MACC officials used to come to see me to
talk about cases, and I would give them
feedback.
I thought it was a
fascinating moment for me, but then
unfortunately, things fell apart
when
I suddenly realized that there was a
case going on involving none other than
the Chief Commissioner of the MACC, Azam
Baki. The MACC Chief was recently
implicated in a shares ownership
scandal. A two-part article detailing
his alleged ownership of millions of
shares in two public listed companies.
In Malaysia, if you're a public
official, you're only allowed to hold a
certain amount in a company's shares,
and the amount that he held was way
beyond the amount he was supposed to
hold.
Where did all the money come from that
allowed him to acquire all the shares?
This became a major controversy in the
country.
There were demonstrations on the street
asking for action against Azam Baki.
This argument made by
Azam Baki did not hold water.
There was no action against the MACC
Chief.
What was also found in the public
records in the shareholding scandal was
cases of Andy Lim investing in a
company, and around the same time, Azam
Baki investing in the company.
In another case, an executive of a
company says that he was summoned to a
meeting with Andy Lim. The suspect
allegedly showed the victim a gun.
According to the police report, a gun
could be seen tucked into his trousers.
With speaking to our sources in the
police, Andy Lim was arrested by the
police, and his gun was taken away.
At some point, Azam Baki allegedly
called the police and asked them to
return Andy Lim's gun.
Because as long as Azam Baki remained as
Chief Commissioner,
the very integrity of the MACC was
brought into question.
So, this was an ideal opportunity now to
appoint someone
who would bring a more independent face
to the MACC.
It did not happen. His contract was
renewed.
Irony of all ironies, he's still there.
A lot of people can't understand that.
Why? This is something somebody should
ask the Prime Minister. The decision to
extend the service of Azam Baki as the
MACC Chief Commissioner was due to his
satisfactory performance. This is
according to Prime Minister Anwar
Ibrahim.
You came in on a platform of
anti-corruption. And actually, not only
you did not remove Azam or make any
other changes, you just made it worse.
With all these allegations against Azam
Baki, why is Anwar repeatedly renewing
his contract, keeping him in office?
My interpretation of it is Azam Baki has
served Anwar Ibrahim quite well in terms
of going after critics of Anwar,
including Daim Zainuddin, former Finance
Minister, who
who
it has been alleged has accumulate had
accumulated a lot of wealth
while he served as Finance Minister in
the 1980s and 1990s. Another person was
Mahathir Mohamad.
If you have money, you have connections,
you have power, you can just fix up
anybody in this country.
I don't feel safe.
What's being alleged is that the
Malaysian Anti-Corruption Commission is
actually corrupt.
This is the agency that's supposed to
police all the other agencies for
corruption in Malaysia.
If the MACC is corrupt, Malaysia has a
serious problem.
MACC
or this government like the emperor who
have no clothes.
They think they look good.
But everybody can see their selective
and discriminatory way they they're
managing.
So, here we have the rhetoric of curbing
corruption and the reality of not really
acting to curb corruption.
It's a question of political will. You
keep all the tools you have
with you
to help keep you in power.
And that's where political will goes out
the window.